prokaryotes, such as bacteria, propagate by binary fission. for unicellular organisms, cell division is the only method to produce new individuals. in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, the outcome of cell reproduction is a pair of daughter cells that are genetically identical to the parent cell. in unicellular organisms, daughter cells are individuals. to achieve the outcome of cloned offspring, certain steps are essential. the genomic dna must be replicated and then allocated into the daughter cells; the cytoplasmic contents must also be divided to give both new cells the machinery to sustain life. in bacterial cells, the genome consists of a single, circular dna chromosome; therefore, the process of cell division is simplified. karyokinesis is unnecessary because there is no nucleus and thus no need to direct one copy of the multiple chromosomes into each daughter cell. this type of cell division is called binary (prokaryotic) fission. due to the relative simplicity of the prokaryotes, the cell division process, called binary fission, is a less complicated and much more rapid process than cell division in eukaryotes. the single, circular dna chromosome of bacteria is not enclosed in a nucleus, but instead occupies a specific location, the nucleoid, within the cell ([link]). although the dna of the nucleoid is associated with proteins that aid in packaging the molecule into a compact size, there are no histone proteins and thus no nucleosomes in prokaryotes. the packing proteins of bacteria are, however, related to the cohesin and condensin proteins involved in the chromosome compaction of eukaryotes. the bacterial chromosome is attached to the plasma membrane at about the midpoint of the cell. the starting point of replication, the origin, is close to the binding site of the chromosome to the plasma membrane ([link]). replication of the dna is bidirectional, moving away from the origin on both strands of the loop simultaneously. as the new double strands are formed, each origin point moves away from the cell wall attachment toward the opposite ends of the cell. as the cell elongates, the growing membrane aids in the transport of the chromosomes. after the chromosomes have cleared the midpoint of the elongated cell, cytoplasmic separation begins. the formation of a ring composed of repeating units of a protein called ftsz directs the partition between the nucleoids. formation of the ftsz ring triggers the accumulation of other proteins that work together to recruit new membrane and cell wall materials to the site. a septum is formed between the nucleoids, extending gradually from the periphery toward the center of the cell. when the new cell walls are in place, the daughter cells separate. mitotic spindle apparatusthe precise timing and formation of the mitotic spindle is critical to the success of eukaryotic cell division. prokaryotic cells, on the other hand, do not undergo karyokinesis and therefore have no need for a mitotic spindle. however, the ftsz protein that plays such a vital role in prokaryotic cytokinesis is structurally and functionally very similar to tubulin, the building block of the microtubules that make up the mitotic spindle fibers that are necessary for eukaryotes. ftsz proteins can form filaments, rings, and other three-dimensional structures that resemble the way tubulin forms microtubules, centrioles, and various cytoskeletal components. in addition, both ftsz and tubulin employ the same energy source, gtp (guanosine triphosphate), to rapidly assemble and disassemble complex structures. ftsz and tubulin are homologous structures derived from common evolutionary origins. in this example, ftsz is the ancestor protein to tubulin (a modern protein). while both proteins are found in extant organisms, tubulin function has evolved and diversified tremendously since evolving from its ftsz prokaryotic origin. a survey of mitotic assembly components found in present-day unicellular eukaryotes reveals crucial intermediary steps to the complex membrane-enclosed genomes of multicellular eukaryotes ([link]). in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell division, the genomic dna is replicated and then each copy is allocated into a daughter cell. in addition, the cytoplasmic contents are divided evenly and distributed to the new cells. however, there are many differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell division. bacteria have a single, circular dna chromosome but no nucleus. therefore, mitosis is not necessary in bacterial cell division. bacterial cytokinesis is directed by a ring composed of a protein called ftsz. ingrowth of membrane and cell wall material from the periphery of the cells results in the formation of a septum that eventually constructs the separate cell walls of the daughter cells.