given the diversity of animal life on our planet, it is not surprising that the animal diet would also vary substantially. the animal diet is the source of materials needed for building dna and other complex molecules needed for growth, maintenance, and reproduction; collectively these processes are called biosynthesis. the diet is also the source of materials for atp production in the cells. the diet must be balanced to provide the minerals and vitamins that are required for cellular function. what are the fundamental requirements of the animal diet? the animal diet should be well balanced and provide nutrients required for bodily function and the minerals and vitamins required for maintaining structure and regulation necessary for good health and reproductive capability. these requirements for a human are illustrated graphically in [link] obesity is a growing epidemic and the rate of obesity among children is rapidly rising in the united states. to combat childhood obesity and ensure that children get a healthy start in life, first lady michelle obama has launched the lets move! campaign. the goal of this campaign is to educate parents and caregivers on providing healthy nutrition and encouraging active lifestyles to future generations. this program aims to involve the entire community, including parents, teachers, and healthcare providers to ensure that children have access to healthy foodsmore fruits, vegetables, and whole grainsand consume fewer calories from processed foods. another goal is to ensure that children get physical activity. with the increase in television viewing and stationary pursuits such as video games, sedentary lifestyles have become the norm. learn more at www.letsmove.gov. the organic molecules required for building cellular material and tissues must come from food. carbohydrates or sugars are the primary source of organic carbons in the animal body. during digestion, digestible carbohydrates are ultimately broken down into glucose and used to provide energy through metabolic pathways. complex carbohydrates, including polysaccharides, can be broken down into glucose through biochemical modification; however, humans do not produce the enzyme cellulase and lack the ability to derive glucose from the polysaccharide cellulose. in humans, these molecules provide the fiber required for moving waste through the large intestine and a healthy colon. the intestinal flora in the human gut are able to extract some nutrition from these plant fibers. the excess sugars in the body are converted into glycogen and stored in the liver and muscles for later use. glycogen stores are used to fuel prolonged exertions, such as long-distance running, and to provide energy during food shortage. excess glycogen can be converted to fats, which are stored in the lower layer of the skin of mammals for insulation and energy storage. excess digestible carbohydrates are stored by mammals in order to survive famine and aid in mobility. another important requirement is that of nitrogen. protein catabolism provides a source of organic nitrogen. amino acids are the building blocks of proteins and protein breakdown provides amino acids that are used for cellular function. the carbon and nitrogen derived from these become the building block for nucleotides, nucleic acids, proteins, cells, and tissues. excess nitrogen must be excreted as it is toxic. fats add flavor to food and promote a sense of satiety or fullness. fatty foods are also significant sources of energy because one gram of fat contains nine calories. fats are required in the diet to aid the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins and the production of fat-soluble hormones. while the animal body can synthesize many of the molecules required for function from the organic precursors, there are some nutrients that need to be consumed from food. these nutrients are termed essential nutrients, meaning they must be eaten, and the body cannot produce them. the omega-3 alpha-linolenic acid and the omega-6 linoleic acid are essential fatty acids needed to make some membrane phospholipids. vitamins are another class of essential organic molecules that are required in small quantities for many enzymes to function and, for this reason, are considered to be co-enzymes. absence or low levels of vitamins can have a dramatic effect on health, as outlined in [link] and [link]. both fat-soluble and water-soluble vitamins must be obtained from food. minerals, listed in [link], are inorganic essential nutrients that must be obtained from food. among their many functions, minerals help in structure and regulation and are considered co-factors. certain amino acids also must be procured from food and cannot be synthesized by the body. these amino acids are the essential amino acids. the human body can synthesize only 11 of the 20 required amino acids; the rest must be obtained from food. the essential amino acids are listed in [link]. animals need food to obtain energy and maintain homeostasis. homeostasis is the ability of a system to maintain a stable internal environment even in the face of external changes to the environment. for example, the normal body temperature of humans is 37c (98.6f). humans maintain this temperature even when the external temperature is hot or cold. it takes energy to maintain this body temperature, and animals obtain this energy from food. the primary source of energy for animals is carbohydrates, mainly glucose. glucose is called the bodys fuel. the digestible carbohydrates in an animals diet are converted to glucose molecules through a series of catabolic chemical reactions. adenosine triphosphate, or atp, is the primary energy currency in cells; atp stores energy in phosphate ester bonds. atp releases energy when the phosphodiester bonds are broken and atp is converted to adp and a phosphate group. atp is produced by the oxidative reactions in the cytoplasm and mitochondrion of the cell, where carbohydrates, proteins, and fats undergo a series of metabolic reactions collectively called cellular respiration. for example, glycolysis is a series of reactions in which glucose is converted to pyruvic acid and some of its chemical potential energy is transferred to nadh and atp. atp is required for all cellular functions. it is used to build the organic molecules that are required for cells and tissues; it provides energy for muscle contraction and for the transmission of electrical signals in the nervous system. when the amount of atp is available in excess of the bodys requirements, the liver uses the excess atp and excess glucose to produce molecules called glycogen. glycogen is a polymeric form of glucose and is stored in the liver and skeletal muscle cells. when blood sugar drops, the liver releases glucose from stores of glycogen. skeletal muscle converts glycogen to glucose during intense exercise. the process of converting glucose and excess atp to glycogen and the storage of excess energy is an evolutionarily important step in helping animals deal with mobility, food shortages, and famine. obesityobesity is a major health concern in the united states, and there is a growing focus on reducing obesity and the diseases it may lead to, such as type-2 diabetes, cancers of the colon and breast, and cardiovascular disease. how does the food consumed contribute to obesity? fatty foods are calorie-dense, meaning that they have more calories per unit mass than carbohydrates or proteins. one gram of carbohydrates has four calories, one gram of protein has four calories, and one gram of fat has nine calories. animals tend to seek lipid-rich food for their higher energy content. the signals of hunger (time to eat) and satiety (time to stop eating) are controlled in the hypothalamus region of the brain. foods that are rich in fatty acids tend to promote satiety more than foods that are rich only in carbohydrates. excess carbohydrate and atp are used by the liver to synthesize glycogen. the pyruvate produced during glycolysis is used to synthesize fatty acids. when there is more glucose in the body than required, the resulting excess pyruvate is converted into molecules that eventually result in the synthesis of fatty acids within the body. these fatty acids are stored in adipose cellsthe fat cells in the mammalian body whose primary role is to store fat for later use. it is important to note that some animals benefit from obesity. polar bears and seals need body fat for insulation and to keep them from losing body heat during arctic winters. when food is scarce, stored body fat provides energy for maintaining homeostasis. fats prevent famine in mammals, allowing them to access energy when food is not available on a daily basis; fats are stored when a large kill is made or lots of food is available. animal diet should be balanced and meet the needs of the body. carbohydrates, proteins, and fats are the primary components of food. some essential nutrients are required for cellular function but cannot be produced by the animal body. these include vitamins, minerals, some fatty acids, and some amino acids. food intake in more than necessary amounts is stored as glycogen in the liver and muscle cells, and in fat cells. excess adipose storage can lead to obesity and serious health problems. atp is the energy currency of the cell and is obtained from the metabolic pathways. excess carbohydrates and energy are stored as glycogen in the body.