the core threat to biodiversity on the planet, and therefore a threat to human welfare, is the combination of human population growth and resource exploitation. the human population requires resources to survive and grow, and those resources are being removed unsustainably from the environment. the three greatest proximate threats to biodiversity are habitat loss, overharvesting, and introduction of exotic species. the first two of these are a direct result of human population growth and resource use. the third results from increased mobility and trade. a fourth major cause of extinction, anthropogenic climate change, has not yet had a large impact, but it is predicted to become significant during this century. global climate change is also a consequence of human population needs for energy and the use of fossil fuels to meet those needs ([link]). environmental issues, such as toxic pollution, have specific targeted effects on species, but they are not generally seen as threats at the magnitude of the others. humans rely on technology to modify their environment and replace certain functions that were once performed by the natural ecosystem. other species cannot do this. elimination of their ecosystemwhether it is a forest, a desert, a grassland, a freshwater estuarine, or a marine environmentwill kill the individuals in the species. remove the entire habitat within the range of a species and, unless they are one of the few species that do well in human-built environments, the species will become extinct. human destruction of habitats accelerated in the latter half of the twentieth century. consider the exceptional biodiversity of sumatra: it is home to one species of orangutan, a species of critically endangered elephant, and the sumatran tiger, but half of sumatras forest is now gone. the neighboring island of borneo, home to the other species of orangutan, has lost a similar area of forest. forest loss continues in protected areas of borneo. the orangutan in borneo is listed as endangered by the international union for conservation of nature (iucn), but it is simply the most visible of thousands of species that will not survive the disappearance of the forests of borneo. the forests are removed for timber and to plant palm oil plantations ([link]). palm oil is used in many products including food products, cosmetics, and biodiesel in europe. a five-year estimate of global forest cover loss for the years 20002005 was 3.1 percent. in the humid tropics where forest loss is primarily from timber extraction, 272,000 km2 was lost out of a global total of 11,564,000 km2 (or 2.4 percent). in the tropics, these losses certainly also represent the extinction of species because of high levels of endemism. preventing habitat destruction with wise wood choicesmost consumers do not imagine that the home improvement products they buy might be contributing to habitat loss and species extinctions. yet the market for illegally harvested tropical timber is huge, and the wood products often find themselves in building supply stores in the united states. one estimate is that 10 percent of the imported timber stream in the united states, which is the worlds largest consumer of wood products, is potentially illegally logged. in 2006, this amounted to $3.6 billion in wood products. most of the illegal products are imported from countries that act as intermediaries and are not the originators of the wood. how is it possible to determine if a wood product, such as flooring, was harvested sustainably or even legally? the forest stewardship council (fsc) certifies sustainably harvested forest products, therefore, looking for their certification on flooring and other hardwood products is one way to ensure that the wood has not been taken illegally from a tropical forest. certification applies to specific products, not to a producer; some producers products may not have certification while other products are certified. while there are other industry-backed certifications other than the fsc, these are unreliable due to lack of independence from the industry. another approach is to buy domestic wood species. while it would be great if there was a list of legal versus illegal wood products, it is not that simple. logging and forest management laws vary from country to country; what is illegal in one country may be legal in another. where and how a product is harvested and whether the forest from which it comes is being maintained sustainably all factor into whether a wood product will be certified by the fsc. it is always a good idea to ask questions about where a wood product came from and how the supplier knows that it was harvested legally. habitat destruction can affect ecosystems other than forests. rivers and streams are important ecosystems and are frequently modified through land development and from damming or water removal. damming of rivers affects the water flow and access to all parts of a river. differing flow regimes can reduce or eliminate populations that are adapted to these changes in flow patterns. for example, an estimated 91percent of river lengths in the united states have been developed: they have modifications like dams, to create energy or store water; levees, to prevent flooding; or dredging or rerouting, to create land that is more suitable for human development. many fish species in the united states, especially rare species or species with restricted distributions, have seen declines caused by river damming and habitat loss. research has confirmed that species of amphibians that must carry out parts of their life cycles in both aquatic and terrestrial habitats have a greater chance of suffering population declines and extinction because of the increased likelihood that one of their habitats or access between them will be lost. overharvesting is a serious threat to many species, but particularly to aquatic species. there are many examples of regulated commercial fisheries monitored by fisheries scientists that have nevertheless collapsed. the western atlantic cod fishery is the most spectacular recent collapse. while it was a hugely productive fishery for 400 years, the introduction of modern factory trawlers in the 1980s and the pressure on the fishery led to it becoming unsustainable. the causes of fishery collapse are both economic and political in nature. most fisheries are managed as a common (shared) resource even when the fishing territory lies within a countrys territorial waters. common resources are subject to an economic pressure known as the tragedy of the commons in which essentially no fisher has a motivation to exercise restraint in harvesting a fishery when it is not owned by that fisher. the natural outcome of harvests of resources held in common is their overexploitation. while large fisheries are regulated to attempt to avoid this pressure, it still exists in the background. this overexploitation is exacerbated when access to the fishery is open and unregulated and when technology gives fishers the ability to overfish. in a few fisheries, the biological growth of the resource is less than the potential growth of the profits made from fishing if that time and money were invested elsewhere. in these caseswhales are an exampleeconomic forces will always drive toward fishing the population to extinction. for the most part, fishery extinction is not equivalent to biological extinctionthe last fish of a species is rarely fished out of the ocean. at the same time, fishery extinction is still harmful to fish species and their ecosystems. there are some instances in which true extinction is a possibility. whales have slow-growing populations and are at risk of complete extinction through hunting. there are some species of sharks with restricted distributions that are at risk of extinction. the groupers are another population of generally slow-growing fishes that, in the caribbean, includes a number of species that are at risk of extinction from overfishing. coral reefs are extremely diverse marine ecosystems that face peril from several processes. reefs are home to 1/3 of the worlds marine fish speciesabout 4,000 speciesdespite making up only 1 percent of marine habitat. most home marine aquaria are stocked with wild-caught organisms, not cultured organisms. although no species is known to have been driven extinct by the pet trade in marine species, there are studies showing that populations of some species have declined in response to harvesting, indicating that the harvest is not sustainable at those levels. there are concerns about the effect of the pet trade on some terrestrial species such as turtles, amphibians, birds, plants, and even the orangutan. bush meat is the generic term used for wild animals killed for food. hunting is practiced throughout the world, but hunting practices, particularly in equatorial africa and parts of asia, are believed to threaten several species with extinction. traditionally, bush meat in africa was hunted to feed families directly; however, recent commercialization of the practice now has bush meat available in grocery stores, which has increased harvest rates to the level of unsustainability. additionally, human population growth has increased the need for protein foods that are not being met from agriculture. species threatened by the bush meat trade are mostly mammals including many primates living in the congo basin. exotic species are species that have been intentionally or unintentionally introduced by humans into an ecosystem in which they did not evolve. such introductions likely occur frequently as natural phenomena. for example, kudzu (pueraria lobata), which is native to japan, was introduced in the united states in 1876. it was later planted for soil conservation. problematically, it grows too well in the southeastern united statesup to a foot a day. it is now a pest species and covers over 7 million acres in the southeastern united states. if an introduced species is able to survive in its new habitat, that introduction is now reflected in the observed range of the species. human transportation of people and goods, including the intentional transport of organisms for trade, has dramatically increased the introduction of species into new ecosystems, sometimes at distances that are well beyond the capacity of the species to ever travel itself and outside the range of the species natural predators. most exotic species introductions probably fail because of the low number of individuals introduced or poor adaptation to the ecosystem they enter. some species, however, possess preadaptations that can make them especially successful in a new ecosystem. these exotic species often undergo dramatic population increases in their new habitat and reset the ecological conditions in the new environment, threatening the species that exist there. for this reason, exotic species are also called invasive species. exotic species can threaten other species through competition for resources, predation, or disease. lakes and islands are particularly vulnerable to extinction threats from introduced species. in lake victoria, as mentioned earlier, the intentional introduction of the nile perch was largely responsible for the extinction of about 200 species of cichlids. the accidental introduction of the brown tree snake via aircraft ([link]) from the solomon islands to guam in 1950 has led to the extinction of three species of birds and three to five species of reptiles endemic to the island. several other species are still threatened. the brown tree snake is adept at exploiting human transportation as a means to migrate; one was even found on an aircraft arriving in corpus christi, texas. constant vigilance on the part of airport, military, and commercial aircraft personnel is required to prevent the snake from moving from guam to other islands in the pacific, especially hawaii. islands do not make up a large area of land on the globe, but they do contain a disproportionate number of endemic species because of their isolation from mainland ancestors. it now appears that the global decline in amphibian species recognized in the 1990s is, in some part, caused by the fungus batrachochytrium dendrobatidis, which causes the disease chytridiomycosis ([link]). there is evidence that the fungus is native to africa and may have been spread throughout the world by transport of a commonly used laboratory and pet species: the african clawed toad (xenopus laevis). it may well be that biologists themselves are responsible for spreading this disease worldwide. the north american bullfrog, rana catesbeiana, which has also been widely introduced as a food animal but which easily escapes captivity, survives most infections of batrachochytrium dendrobatidis and can act as a reservoir for the disease. early evidence suggests that another fungal pathogen, geomyces destructans, introduced from europe is responsible for white-nose syndrome, which infects cave-hibernating bats in eastern north america and has spread from a point of origin in western new york state ([link]). the disease has decimated bat populations and threatens extinction of species already listed as endangered: the indiana bat, myotis sodalis, and potentially the virginia big-eared bat, corynorhinus townsendii virginianus. how the fungus was introduced is unclear, but one logical presumption would be that recreational cavers unintentionally brought the fungus on clothes or equipment from europe. climate change, and specifically the anthropogenic (meaning, caused by humans) warming trend presently underway, is recognized as a major extinction threat, particularly when combined with other threats such as habitat loss. scientists disagree about the likely magnitude of the effects, with extinction rate estimates ranging from 15 percent to 40 percent of species committed to extinction by 2050. scientists do agree, however, that climate change will alter regional climates, including rainfall and snowfall patterns, making habitats less hospitable to the species living in them. the warming trend will shift colder climates toward the north and south poles, forcing species to move with their adapted climate norms while facing habitat gaps along the way. the shifting ranges will impose new competitive regimes on species as they find themselves in contact with other species not present in their historic range. one such unexpected species contact is between polar bears and grizzly bears. previously, these two species had separate ranges. now, their ranges are overlapping and there are documented cases of these two species mating and producing viable offspring. changing climates also throw off species delicate timing adaptations to seasonal food resources and breeding times. many contemporary mismatches to shifts in resource availability and timing have already been documented. range shifts are already being observed: for example, some european bird species ranges have moved 91 km northward. the same study suggested that the optimal shift based on warming trends was double that distance, suggesting that the populations are not moving quickly enough. range shifts have also been observed in plants, butterflies, other insects, freshwater fishes, reptiles, and mammals. climate gradients will also move up mountains, eventually crowding species higher in altitude and eliminating the habitat for those species adapted to the highest elevations. some climates will completely disappear. the rate of warming appears to be accelerated in the arctic, which is recognized as a serious threat to polar bear populations that require sea ice to hunt seals during the winter months: seals are the only source of protein available to polar bears. a trend to decreasing sea ice coverage has occurred since observations began in the mid-twentieth century. the rate of decline observed in recent years is far greater than previously predicted by climate models. finally, global warming will raise ocean levels due to melt water from glaciers and the greater volume of warmer water. shorelines will be inundated, reducing island size, which will have an effect on some species, and a number of islands will disappear entirely. additionally, the gradual melting and subsequent refreezing of the poles, glaciers, and higher elevation mountainsa cycle that has provided freshwater to environments for centurieswill also be jeopardized. this could result in an overabundance of salt water and a shortage of fresh water. the core threats to biodiversity are human population growth and unsustainable resource use. to date, the most significant causes of extinctions are habitat loss, introduction of exotic species, and overharvesting. climate change is predicted to be a significant cause of extinctions in the coming century. habitat loss occurs through deforestation, damming of rivers, and other activities. overharvesting is a threat particularly to aquatic species, while the taking of bush meat in the humid tropics threatens many species in asia, africa, and the americas. exotic species have been the cause of a number of extinctions and are especially damaging to islands and lakes. exotic species introductions are increasing because of the increased mobility of human populations and growing global trade and transportation. climate change is forcing range changes that may lead to extinction. it is also affecting adaptations to the timing of resource availability that negatively affects species in seasonal environments. the impacts of climate change are greatest in the arctic. global warming will also raise sea levels, eliminating some islands and reducing the area of all others.