it may not be clear why biologists are concerned about biodiversity loss. when biodiversity loss is thought of as the extinction of the passenger pigeon, the dodo bird, and even the woolly mammoth, the loss may appear to be an emotional one. but is the loss practically important for the welfare of the human species? from the perspective of evolution and ecology, the loss of a particular individual species is unimportant (however, the loss of a keystone species can lead to ecological disaster). extinction is a normal part of macroevolution. but the accelerated extinction rate means the loss of tens of thousands of species within our lifetimes, and it is likely to have dramatic effects on human welfare through the collapse of ecosystems and in added costs to maintain food production, clean air and water, and human health. agriculture began after early hunter-gatherer societies first settled in one place and heavily modified their immediate environment. this cultural transition has made it difficult for humans to recognize their dependence on undomesticated living things on the planet. biologists recognize the human species is embedded in ecosystems and is dependent on them, just as every other species on the planet is dependent. technology smoothes out the extremes of existence, but ultimately the human species cannot exist without its ecosystem. contemporary societies that live close to the land often have a broad knowledge of the medicinal uses of plants growing in their area. most plants produce secondary plant compounds, which are toxins used to protect the plant from insects and other animals that eat them, but some of which also work as medication. for centuries in europe, older knowledge about the medical uses of plants was compiled in herbalsbooks that identified plants and their uses. humans are not the only species to use plants for medicinal reasons: the great apes, orangutans, chimpanzees, bonobos, and gorillas have all been observed self-medicating with plants. modern pharmaceutical science also recognizes the importance of these plant compounds. examples of significant medicines derived from plant compounds include aspirin, codeine, digoxin, atropine, and vincristine ([link]). many medicines were once derived from plant extracts but are now synthesized. it is estimated that, at one time, 25 percent of modern drugs contained at least one plant extract. that number has probably decreased to about 10 percent as natural plant ingredients are replaced by synthetic versions. antibiotics, which are responsible for extraordinary improvements in health and lifespans in developed countries, are compounds largely derived from fungi and bacteria. in recent years, animal venoms and poisons have excited intense research for their medicinal potential. by 2007, the fda had approved five drugs based on animal toxins to treat diseases such as hypertension, chronic pain, and diabetes. another five drugs are undergoing clinical trials, and at least six drugs are being used in other countries. other toxins under investigation come from mammals, snakes, lizards, various amphibians, fish, snails, octopuses, and scorpions. aside from representing billions of dollars in profits, these medicines improve peoples lives. pharmaceutical companies are actively looking for new compounds synthesized by living organisms that can function as medicine. it is estimated that 1/3 of pharmaceutical research and development is spent on natural compounds and that about 35 percent of new drugs brought to market between 1981 and 2002 were from natural compounds. the opportunities for new medications will be reduced in direct proportion to the disappearance of species. since the beginning of human agriculture more than 10,000 years ago, human groups have been breeding and selecting crop varieties. this crop diversity matched the cultural diversity of highly subdivided populations of humans. for example, potatoes were domesticated beginning around 7,000 years ago in the central andes of peru and bolivia. the potatoes grown in that region belong to seven species and the number of varieties likely is in the thousands. each variety has been bred to thrive at particular elevations and soil and climate conditions. the diversity is driven by the diverse demands of the topography, the limited movement of people, and the demands created by crop rotation for different varieties that will do well in different fields. potatoes are only one example of human-generated diversity. every plant, animal, and fungus that has been cultivated by humans has been bred from original wild ancestor species into diverse varieties arising from the demands for food value, adaptation to growing conditions, and resistance to pests. the potato demonstrates a well-known example of the risks of low crop diversity: the tragic irish potato famine when the single variety grown in ireland became susceptible to a potato blight, wiping out the crop. the loss of the crop led to famine, death, and mass emigration. resistance to disease is a chief benefit to maintaining crop biodiversity, and lack of diversity in contemporary crop species carries similar risks. seed companies, which are the source of most crop varieties in developed countries, must continually breed new varieties to keep up with evolving pest organisms. these same seed companies, however, have participated in the decline of the number of varieties available as they focus on selling fewer varieties in more areas of the world. the ability to create new crop varieties relies on the diversity of varieties available and the accessibility of wild forms related to the crop plant. these wild forms are often the source of new gene variants that can be bred with existing varieties to create varieties with new attributes. loss of wild species related to a crop will mean the loss of potential in crop improvement. maintaining the genetic diversity of wild species related to domesticated species ensures our continued food supply. since the 1920s, government agriculture departments have maintained seed banks of crop varieties as a way to maintain crop diversity. this system has flaws because, over time, seed banks are lost through accidents, and there is no way to replace them. in 2008, the svalbard global seed vault ([link]) began storing seeds from around the world as a backup system to the regional seed banks. if a regional seed bank stores varieties in svalbard, losses can be replaced from svalbard. the seed vault is located deep into the rock of  an arctic island. conditions within the vault are maintained at ideal temperature and humidity for seed survival, but the deep underground location of the vault in the arctic means that failure of the vaults systems will not compromise the climatic conditions inside the vault. crop success s is largely dependent on the quality of the soil. although some agricultural soils are rendered sterile using controversial cultivation and chemical treatments, most contain a huge diversity of organisms that maintain nutrient cyclesbreaking down organic matter into nutrient compounds that crops need for growth. these organisms also maintain soil texture that affects water and oxygen dynamics in the soil that are necessary for plant growth. if farmers had to maintain arable soil using alternate means, the cost of food would be much higher than it is now. these kinds of processes are called ecosystem services. they occur within ecosystems, such as soil ecosystems, as a result of the diverse metabolic activities of the organisms living there, but they provide benefits to human food production, drinking water availability, and breathable air. other key ecosystem services related to food production are plant pollination and crop pest control. over 150 crops in the united states require pollination to produce. one estimate of the benefit of honeybee pollination within the united states is $1.6 billion per year; other pollinators contribute up to $6.7 billion more. many honeybee populations are managed by apiarists who rent out their hives services to farmers. honeybee populations in north america have been suffering large losses caused by a syndrome known as colony collapse disorder, whose cause is unclear. other pollinators include a diverse array of other bee species and various insects and birds. loss of these species would make growing crops requiring pollination impossible, increasing dependence on other crops. finally, humans compete for their food with crop pests, most of which are insects. pesticides control these competitors; however, pesticides  are costly and lose their effectiveness over time as pest populations adapt. they also lead to collateral damage by killing non-pest species and risking the health of consumers and agricultural workers. ecologists believe that the bulk of the work in removing pests is actually done by predators and parasites of those pests, but the impact has not been well studied. a review found that in 74 percent of studies that looked for an effect of landscape complexity on natural enemies of pests, the greater the complexity, the greater the effect of pest-suppressing organisms. an experimental study found that introducing multiple enemies of pea aphids (an important alfalfa pest) increased the yield of alfalfa significantly. this study shows the importance of landscape diversity via the question of whether a diversity of pests is more effective at control than one single pest; the results showed this to be the case. loss of diversity in pest enemies will inevitably make it more difficult and costly to grow food. in addition to growing crops and raising animals for food, humans obtain food resources from wild populations, primarily fish populations. for approximately 1 billion people, aquatic resources provide the main source of animal protein. but since 1990, global fish production has declined. despite considerable effort, few fisheries on the planet are managed for sustainability. fishery extinctions rarely lead to complete extinction of the harvested species, but rather to a radical restructuring of the marine ecosystem in which a dominant species is so over-harvested that it becomes a minor player, ecologically. in addition to humans losing the food source, these alterations affect many other species in ways that are difficult or impossible to predict. the collapse of fisheries has dramatic and long-lasting effects on local populations that work in the fishery. in addition, the loss of an inexpensive protein source to populations that cannot afford to replace it will increase the cost of living and limit societies in other ways. in general, the fish taken from fisheries have shifted to smaller species as larger species are fished to extinction. the ultimate outcome could clearly be the loss of aquatic systems as food sources. finally, it has been argued that humans benefit psychologically from living in a biodiverse world. a chief proponent of this idea is entomologist e. o. wilson. he argues that human evolutionary history has adapted us to live in a natural environment and that built environments generate stressors that affect human health and well-being. there is considerable research into the psychological regenerative benefits of natural landscapes that suggests the hypothesis may hold some truth. in addition, there is a moral argument that humans have a responsibility to inflict as little harm as possible on other species. humans use many compounds that were first discovered or derived from living organisms as medicines: secondary plant compounds, animal toxins, and antibiotics produced by bacteria and fungi. more medicines are expected to be discovered in nature. loss of biodiversity will impact the number of pharmaceuticals available to humans. crop diversity is a requirement for food security, and it is being lost. the loss of wild relatives to crops also threatens breeders abilities to create new varieties. ecosystems provide ecosystem services that support human agriculture: pollination, nutrient cycling, pest control, and soil development and maintenance. loss of biodiversity threatens these ecosystem services and risks making food production more expensive or impossible. wild food sources are mainly aquatic, but few are being managed for sustainability. fisheries ability to provide protein to human populations is threatened when extinction occurs. biodiversity may provide important psychological benefits to humans. additionally, there are moral arguments for the maintenance of biodiversity.