nucleic acids are the most important macromolecules for the continuity of life. they carry the genetic blueprint of a cell and carry instructions for the functioning of the cell. the two main types of nucleic acids are deoxyribonucleic acid (dna) and ribonucleic acid (rna). dna is the genetic material found in all living organisms, ranging from single-celled bacteria to multicellular mammals. it is found in the nucleus of eukaryotes and in the organelles, chloroplasts, and mitochondria. in prokaryotes, the dna is not enclosed in a membranous envelope. the entire genetic content of a cell is known as its genome, and the study of genomes is genomics. in eukaryotic cells but not in prokaryotes, dna forms a complex with histone proteins to form chromatin, the substance of eukaryotic chromosomes. a chromosome may contain tens of thousands of genes. many genes contain the information to make protein products; other genes code for rna products. dna controls all of the cellular activities by turning the genes on or off. the other type of nucleic acid, rna, is mostly involved in protein synthesis. the dna molecules never leave the nucleus but instead use an intermediary to communicate with the rest of the cell. this intermediary is the messenger rna (mrna). other types of rnalike rrna, trna, and micrornaare involved in protein synthesis and its regulation. dna and rna are made up of monomers known as nucleotides. the nucleotides combine with each other to form a polynucleotide, dna or rna. each nucleotide is made up of three components: a nitrogenous base, a pentose (five-carbon) sugar, and a phosphate group ([link]). each nitrogenous base in a nucleotide is attached to a sugar molecule, which is attached to one or more phosphate groups. the nitrogenous bases, important components of nucleotides, are organic molecules and are so named because they contain carbon and nitrogen. they are bases because they contain an amino group that has the potential of binding an extra hydrogen, and thus, decreases the hydrogen ion concentration in its environment, making it more basic. each nucleotide in dna contains one of four possible nitrogenous bases: adenine (a), guanine (g) cytosine (c), and thymine (t). adenine and guanine are classified as purines. the primary structure of a purine is two carbon-nitrogen rings. cytosine, thymine, and uracil are classified as pyrimidines which have a single carbon-nitrogen ring as their primary structure ([link]). each of these basic carbon-nitrogen rings has different functional groups attached to it. in molecular biology shorthand, the nitrogenous bases are simply known by their symbols a, t, g, c, and u. dna contains a, t, g, and c whereas rna contains a, u, g, and c. the pentose sugar in dna is deoxyribose, and in rna, the sugar is ribose ([link]). the difference between the sugars is the presence of the hydroxyl group on the second carbon of the ribose and hydrogen on the second carbon of the deoxyribose. the carbon atoms of the sugar molecule are numbered as 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 (1 is read as one prime). the phosphate residue is attached to the hydroxyl group of the 5 carbon of one sugar and the hydroxyl group of the 3 carbon of the sugar of the next nucleotide, which forms a 53 phosphodiester linkage. the phosphodiester linkage is not formed by simple dehydration reaction like the other linkages connecting monomers in macromolecules: its formation involves the removal of two phosphate groups. a polynucleotide may have thousands of such phosphodiester linkages. dna has a double-helix structure ([link]). the sugar and phosphate lie on the outside of the helix, forming the backbone of the dna. the nitrogenous bases are stacked in the interior, like the steps of a staircase, in pairs; the pairs are bound to each other by hydrogen bonds. every base pair in the double helivx is separated from the next base pair by 0.34 nm. the two strands of the helix run in opposite directions, meaning that the 5 carbon end of one strand will face the 3 carbon end of its matching strand. (this is referred to as antiparallel orientation and is important to dna replication and in many nucleic acid interactions.) only certain types of base pairing are allowed. for example, a certain purine can only pair with a certain pyrimidine. this means a can pair with t, and g can pair with c, as shown in [link]. this is known as the base complementary rule. in other words, the dna strands are complementary to each other. if the sequence of one strand is aattggcc, the complementary strand would have the sequence ttaaccgg. during dna replication, each strand is copied, resulting in a daughter dna double helix containing one parental dna strand and a newly synthesized strand. in a double stranded dna molecule, the two strands run antiparallel to one another so that one strand runs 5 to 3 and the other 3 to 5. the phosphate backbone is located on the outside, and the bases are in the middle. adenine forms hydrogen bonds (or base pairs) with thymine, and guanine base pairs with cytosine.


 a mutation occurs, and cytosine is replaced with adenine. what impact do you think this will have on the dna structure? ribonucleic acid, or rna, is mainly involved in the process of protein synthesis under the direction of dna. rna is usually single-stranded and is made of ribonucleotides that are linked by phosphodiester bonds. a ribonucleotide in the rna chain contains ribose (the pentose sugar), one of the four nitrogenous bases (a, u, g, and c), and the phosphate group. there are four major types of rna: messenger rna (mrna), ribosomal rna (rrna), transfer rna (trna), and microrna (mirna). the first, mrna, carries the message from dna, which controls all of the cellular activities in a cell. if a cell requires a certain protein to be synthesized, the gene for this product is turned on and the messenger rna is synthesized in the nucleus. the rna base sequence is complementary to the coding sequence of the dna from which it has been copied. however, in rna, the base t is absent and u is present instead. if the dna strand has a sequence aattgcgc, the sequence of the complementary rna is uuaacgcg. in the cytoplasm, the mrna interacts with ribosomes and other cellular machinery ([link]). the mrna is read in sets of three bases known as codons. each codon codes for a single amino acid. in this way, the mrna is read and the protein product is made. ribosomal rna (rrna) is a major constituent of ribosomes on which the mrna binds. the rrna ensures the proper alignment of the mrna and the ribosomes; the rrna of the ribosome also has an enzymatic activity (peptidyl transferase) and catalyzes the formation of the peptide bonds between two aligned amino acids. transfer rna (trna) is one of the smallest of the four types of rna, usually 7090 nucleotides long. it carries the correct amino acid to the site of protein synthesis. it is the base pairing between the trna and mrna that allows for the correct amino acid to be inserted in the polypeptide chain. micrornas are the smallest rna molecules and their role involves the regulation of gene expression by interfering with the expression of certain mrna messages. [link] summarizes features of dna and rna. even though the rna is single stranded, most rna types show extensive intramolecular base pairing between complementary sequences, creating a predictable three-dimensional structure essential for their function. as you have learned, information flow in an organism takes place from dna to rna to protein. dna dictates the structure of mrna in a process known as transcription, and rna dictates the structure of protein in a process known as translation. this is known as the central dogma of life, which holds true for all organisms; however, exceptions to the rule occur in connection with viral infections. nucleic acids are molecules made up of nucleotides that direct cellular activities such as cell division and protein synthesis. each nucleotide is made up of a pentose sugar, a nitrogenous base, and a phosphate group. there are two types of nucleic acids: dna and rna. dna carries the genetic blueprint of the cell and is passed on from parents to offspring (in the form of chromosomes). it has a double-helical structure with the two strands running in opposite directions, connected by hydrogen bonds, and complementary to each other. rna is single-stranded and is made of a pentose sugar (ribose), a nitrogenous base, and a phosphate group. rna is involved in protein synthesis and its regulation. messenger rna (mrna) is copied from the dna, is exported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, and contains information for the construction of proteins. ribosomal rna (rrna) is a part of the ribosomes at the site of protein synthesis, whereas transfer rna (trna) carries the amino acid to the site of protein synthesis. microrna regulates the use of mrna for protein synthesis.